/*
 * $Id$
 */

Overview:

SimpLex uses high-level definitions, which for many programmers might be
more readable, than equivalent Flex definitions. SimpLex Language
Definitions are divided into 6 main sections:

1. Delimiters. There are 3 kinds of Lexical Delimiters:

   a. Ignorable. Typical example of such delimiters is "white space", i.e.
      space and tab.

   b. Returnable. Typical examples of such delimiters are commas,
      parenthesis, and math operators.

   c. Appendables. While I don't have any examples in mind, I suspect there
      might be a need for such delimiters. This kind of delimiters should be
      appended to the preceding token, in effect making such delimiter a
      terminator character.

2. Streams. These are also referred to as "pairs". Stream or Pair, as the
   name may suggest, is any sequence (or stream) of characters, enclosed
   within a STARTing character[s] and an ENDing character[s] (the pair).
   Typical example of such lexical element is a LITERAL string, i.e. "Hello
   World".

3. Self Contained Words. These are a specific set of reserved words, which
   do NOT require ANY delimiters. These words might be viewed as a form of
   Meta Delimiters. These words will be extracted from the input stream,
   regardless of any preceding, or succeeding characters. Typical example of
   such tokens are the dBase' .AND. .OR. .NOT. logical operators, the C
   language inline assignment operators += *= etc., as well as pre and post
   increment/decrement operators -- and ++. The unique attribute of such
   elements is the fact that these elements do NOT require preceding or
   succeeding delimiters.

4. Keywords. These are specific set of reserved words, which have lexical
   significance in the defined language, when appearing as the FIRST token
   in a given source line. Keywords may be contrcuted of multiple words with
   sperarting white space (ignorable delimiters), when using the predefined
   match pattern {WS}.

5. Words. These are specific set of reserved words, which have lexical
   significance in the defined language, when appearing ANYWHERE in a given
   source line. Words may be contrcuted of multiple words with sperarting white
   space (ignorable delimiters), when using the predefined match pattern {WS}.

6. Rules. There are 2 kinds of rules:

   a. Reduction Rules. These kind of rules defines the translation of a 1 or
      more tokens into 1 or more other tokens (or custom actions). Reductions
      are infinitley recursive, which means that the Reduction Results, are
      pushed back, incase they me in turn be part of yet another rule. To
      eliminate such recursive cycle, Reduction Result may be in the form of
      n + DONT_REDUCE, thus passing through the resulted token, without
      further checks.

   b. Pass Through (Left Associate). This kind of rules directs the Lexer to
      accept such token[s] as a valid form.

